hurricanes they're no laughing matter it
can take people months or years to fully
recover imagine what it's like for
underwater creatures with a surplus of
gills and a deficit of opposable thumbs
you know like fish now people normally
snap to attention and take shelter as a
storm approaches land but the storms
spend most of their time out at sea if
you count the loss of coral reefs and
other marine life that's also where it
does most of its damage some animals
such as sharks and other fast swimmers
are generally in the clear sharks have
even organs known as lateral lines which
allow them to detect the changes in
barometric pressure accompanying severe
storms these long fluid-filled tubes are
similar in form and function to a
human's inner ear and are extremely
sensitive to vibrations in the water
this is how sharks can hear the
thrashing of injured prey through
hundreds of feet of water it also acts
as an effective early warning system
like the National Weather Service for
oceanic carnivores when they sense a
hurricane or tropical storm approaching
sharks respond by moving into deeper
water only returning to their usual
territory once the danger is passed
other creatures confirmed to have innate
storm avoidance include various species
of sea snakes there's evidence that
other fish species may be able to sense
the pressure changes as well
dolphins are another large aquatic
species able to sense approaching storms
although they get there through a
different route instead of sensing
barometric pressure
dolphins can detect approaching storms
based on how much salt is in the water
around them you see hurricanes dump a
lot of fresh water into the ocean in the
form of rain this temporarily
reduces the salinity of the water near
the surface tipping off the Dolphins
that something might be wrong as with
sharks and other pressure sensitive sea
creatures dolphins respond to this
disturbance by fleeing into the deeper
waters of the open ocean
but unlike shore
dolphins still need to surface every 10
to 15 minutes for air merely being
farther from shore offers a degree of
protection from many of the Hurricanes
effects speaking of effects what is it
that has the kings of the ocean swimming
scare it has to be something pretty bad
if this species needed to develop innate
responses to extreme weather the answer
is a little bit complicated but has to
do with what happens to the water when a
significant storm is overhead it all
begins on the surface where the gale
force winds blow across the water to
create waves these waves get bigger the
more when they catch and catch more wind
the bigger they get as this cycle
continues the water beneath the waves
starts to move in a circular motion this
pulls on the water just below it until
another circle forms soon more form
below that one the hoops get smaller and
smaller until they cease entirely
explaining why so many creatures flee to
deeper water things start to get really
ugly when the storm passes over shallow
water and those circles can reach the
seabed since sand and rock aren't quite
as fluid as well fluid the cycle gets
interrupted instead of circles the water
starts to move back and forth across the
sea floor these rapid motions disturb
the sediment kicking up lots of sand
rocks and even the occasional shipwreck
it doesn't take an oceanographer to tell
you that all this flying debris is
terrible for the local wildlife anything
that isn't fast or mobile enough to get
out of the way is going to find itself
in serious trouble so who's still on the
hook
territorial fish unwilling to abandon
their claims and slow movers like sea
horses are similarly jeopardized
crustaceans don't fare much better and
neither do sea turtles or stationary
mammals such as sponges oysters and sea
cucumbers I wouldn't like to get
battered with several tons of sand and
rock and I'd probably feel the same if I
were a clam fish also need to worry
about the dust clogging their gills and
the swirling motion often deprives the
water of oxygen
these same motions can also pull in the
saltier water from deeper parts of the
ocean and many coastal fish aren't
adapted to survive in such an
environment now there is one creature
whose fate we haven't discussed and it's
one of the most important to any ocean
ecosystem can you guess what it is it's
the first sea creature I mentioned it's
coral yep that weird rock plant is
actually a massive colony of tiny
invertebrates and these wonders of
organic architecture are the centerpiece
for a multitude of marine habitats
hurricanes are an all-around bad thing
for most aquatic life for that matter
they're a terrible thing for any
organism in their path coral is the
closest any creature comes to being an
exception moving water and flying debris
are also known to destroy coral
formations with ease but that isn't
always a bad thing
coral fragments that survive their
displacement can take root wherever they
land this is the primary way coral
spreads to new locations unfortunately
this process isn't without risk for the
coral itself fragmented coral is
vulnerable to injury or disease making
its survival uncertain there's also the
possibility that the pieces can become
buried in the sediment the hurricane
kicked up well the sheer volume of
fragments guarantees that a few will
take root they're slow to grow such a
cycle might have been sustainable once
but with coral reefs already struggling
due to pollution and other factors the
damage just isn't being repaired quickly
enough as many creatures find themselves
robbed of their habitats literally
overnight well that's a sad note to end
on so let's not end on it there is a ray
of hope for the continued existence of
marine habitats people have been taking
notice and artificial reefs have been
popping up around the world for quite
some time there are plenty of human-made
objects that can double as fish and
crustacean habitats and eventually
become the foundation for a coral reef
structure very often the reefs began as
repurposed garbage with old ships and
derelict oil rigs
being among the most popular choices the
object in question will be sunk in a
strategic location along an ocean
current the current carries plankton to
the structure which attracts small fish
like minnows and sardines in turn these
attract larger fish such as tuna and
sharks as well as medium-sized creatures
looking for a place to hide over the
following years the structure becomes
encrusted with barnacles and corals and
just like that almost before you know it
a new coral reef is born
now artificial reefs don't always work
as intended one early example was the
now infamous Osborn reef off the coast
of Fort Lauderdale Florida the reef was
assembled in 1972 as a way to boost the
local fishing industry while finding an
environmentally friendly way to dispose
of millions of discarded tires the tires
were secured with a combination of steel
and nylon cables and anchored to the
seabed by a circle of large concrete
blocks while things went well at first
no steps were taken to make sure the
steel cables wouldn't rust which they
did a few tropical storms leader
millions of tires wound up spread across
hundreds of miles of coastline Osborn
reef might be the simultaneous poster
child for unintended consequences still
there are plenty of successful attempts
at reef building around the world